# 01.1 Graph Theory Introduction

---

## Types of Graphs

### Undirected Graph

* graph in which edges have no orientation.
* The edge (u,v) is identical to the edge (v, u)
    - city connected by bidirectional road

### Directed Graph

* graph in which edges have orientations.
  - person u who bought a gift for v

### Special Graphs

#### Tree

* undirected graph with no cycles.

#### Rooted Tree

* A tree with a **designated root node**
  - a node where every edge either points away from or towards.

#### Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs)

* Directed graphs with no cycles.
* Represents the **structures with dependencies**.
* All out-trees are DAGs but not all DAGs are out-trees.

#### Bipartite Graph

* one whose vertices can be split into two independent groups U, V such that every edge connects between U and V.
* The graph is two colourable
* There is no odd length cycle.

#### Complete Graphs

* One where there is a **unique edge between every pair of nodes**
* Expressed as Kn

---

## Representatin of Graphs

### Adjacency Matrix

* m[i][j] represents the edge weight of going from i to j
* pros
    - space efficient for representing dense graphs
    - edge weight lookup is O(1)
    -Simplest graph representation
* Cons
    - Requires O(V^2) space
    - Iterating over all edges takes O(V^2) times.

### Adjacency List

* represent a graph as a map from nodes to list of edges.
* A -> [(B, 4), (C, 1)], ...
    - Node A can reach Node B with cost 4
* pros
    - space efficient for representing sparse graphs
    - Iterating over all edges is efficient
* cons
    - Less space efficient for denser graphs.
    - Edge weight lookup is O(E)
    - slightly more complex graph representation

### Edge List

* Way to represent graph simply as an **ordered list of edges**.
* [(C, A, 4), (A, C, 1), ...]
* seldomly used
* pros
    - Space efficient for representing sparse graphs
    - Iterating over all edges is efficient
    - Very simple structure
* cons
    - Less space efficient for denser graphs.
    - Edge weight lookup is O(E)

---

# 01.2 Problems in Graph Theory

---

### 4 things to consider solving problem using Graph theory
1. Is the graph directed / undiredted?
2. Are the edges of the graph weighted?
3. Is the graph I will encounter likely to be sparse or dense with edges?
4. Should I use an adjacency matrix, adjacency list, an edge list or other structure to represent the graph efficiently?

---

## Shortest path problem

* Given a weighted graph, **find the shortest path of edges** from node A to node B.
* Algorithms
    - BFS (unweighted graph)
    - Dijkstra's
    - Bellman-Ford
    - Floyd-Warshall
    - A*
    - ...

## Connectivity

* Does there **exist a path** between node A and node B?
* Algorithms
    - Union find data Structure
    - Search Algorithm(e.g. DFS)

## Detecting Negative Cycles

* Does my weighted digraph have any negative cycles?
* If so, where?
* Algorithms
    - Bellman-Ford
    - Floyd-Warshall
    
## Strongly Connected Components

* Self-contained cycles within a directed graph where every vertex in a given cycle can reach every other vertex in thee same cycle.
* Algorithms
    - Tarjan's
    - Kosaraju's

## Traveling Salesman Problem

* Given a list of cities and the distances between each pair of cities, what is the shortest possible route that visits each city exactly once and returns to the origin city?
* Algorithms
    - Held-Karp
    - Branch and Bound

## Bridges

* Bridge / cut edge is any edge in a graph whose removal increases the number of connected components.
* Weak point, bottleneck, vulnerabilities in a graph. 

## Articulation points

* Any node in a graph whose removal increases the number of connected components.
* same with Bridges

## Minimum Spanning Tree

* Subset of the edges of a connected, edge-weighted graph that connects all the vertices together, without any cycles and with the minimum possible total edge weight.
* Algorithms
    - Kruskal's
    - Prim's
    - Boruvka's

## Network flow: max flow

* With an infinite input source, how much "flow" can we push through the network?
* Suppose the edges are roads with cars, pipes with water or hallways with packed with people. Flow represents the volume of water allowed to flow through the pipes, the number of cars the roads can sustain in traffic and the maximum amount of people that can navigate through the hallways.
* Algorithms
    - Ford-Fulkerson
    - Edmonds-Karp & Dinic's